# [Day 10](http://adventofcode.com/2017/day/10) in Erlang

After doing tomorrow's puzzle in J, going back to even a somewhat quirky
language like Erlang feels like a breath of fresh air. I've never actually
written any Erlang before, but I like its notion of processes and its approach
to robustness. It reminds me a bit of Go, although of course Erlang was first.

In fact, I always thought Erlang was a procedural language, but it seems like I
was mistaken: it has much more in common with functional languages than with
procedural ones. For instance, there's powerful pattern matching, most looping
is done using recursion or higher-order functions, and variables can't be
reassigned.

To remain true to the Erlang spirit, I'm going to implement this puzzle as a
bunch of numbered processes, where each process holds one item of the list.
They do all the work by passing messages between them.

After reading the input (straightforward for a change), we create all the
processes. Any process needs to be able to send its value to any other process,
so we pass the entire list of pids to all processes. They store this as a
function argument, as is common in functional languages.

Then the fun part: for input value, we send it to all processes. The process
inspects the value, and if it's in the range to be swapped, it sends its
current value to the appropriate destination process. If it's not in the range
to be swapped, it just sends it to itself (we could probably skip this). Next,
the process receives its new value from itself or one of its colleagues. If it
receives a special `report` message (sent from the main process), it responds
with its current value and exits.

The main process, after sending out all the input, simply sends `report` to
processes 1 and 2 (lists are 1-based in Erlang), waits for two answers,
multiplies them and prints the result.

This all worked and gave me the right answer! Once, as I found out. Apparently
I messed something up, and it's actually nondeterministic â€“ but it works
"reliably" when I leave my debug printing in. Good enough, because bedtime is
drawing near.

---

For the second part, it seems I can conveniently treat an Erlang string as a
list of numbers. Doing the additional rounds is easy, except it's too slow with
my debug printing, so I have to fix this synchronization bug after all...
Eventually it dawned on me: these processes are _not_ in lockstep; for example,
if a process only sends to itself, it can get ahead of the others. And if
it then hits a point where it does send a value to another process, the other
process might be receiving its values out of order... and boom.

As a fix, I'll have all processes report "done" to the main process before we
send out the next round of input. This increases the number of messages by 50%,
but we weren't exactly going for efficiency here anyway. This worked well.

The final hash computation will be done on the main process. As the last step,
it asks every worker for its value, and sticks them all into a list. Then it's
a simple matter of sequential code to find the answer.
